Welcome my friend to today's
lecture on blood relation.
Let's unpack the mystery of this concept
without needing a PhD or a panic attack.
Concept explanation.
All right.
My friends, blood relation, as the
name suggests, is a fascinating
topic in reasoning ability.
It's all about understanding and
analyzing the various relationships that.
Tie a family together, whether
they're based on ancestry or marriage.
Think of it like being
the family detective.
To ace these problems, you just
need to accurately identify
how everyone is connected.
Perhaps by sketching out a quick
family tree in your mind or on paper
using some clever logical deduction.
The main goal, my friend, is to
correctly figure out if someone
is a parent, a child, a sibling.
A grandparent, a grandchild, an aunt, an
uncle, a niece, a nephew, or a spouse,
all based on the information given.
Easy peasy, right?
Real world relevance.
Now, why is understanding
relationships so important you ask?
Well, it's absolutely crucial in our
daily lives for clear communication
and smooth social interactions.
Imagine calling your aunt your cousin.
Oops.
In a banking role, for instance,
accurately interpreting these
relationships can be super vital
for tasks like verifying customer
information or handling those sensitive
family related financial matters.
Breakdown of question types based
on past patterns for your exam.
Blood relation questions generally
fall into three main categories.
First up, we have direct relation
questions making up about 50% of the pie.
These are pretty straightforward
statements, just describing relationships
between two or more individuals.
Your job is to deduce a specific
relationship from these direct statements.
Then accounting for about 30%,
we find coded relation questions.
Here, relationships are expressed using
codes or symbols, like A plus B means A
is the father of B. You simply need to
decode the given expression to unravel
the relationship between two entities.
And finally, around 20% are puzzle
or dialogue based questions.
These are a bit like a family drama,
presenting a scenario where someone points
to another person or talks about them.
You then have to figure out the
relationship based on the dialogue
or a set of complex, interconnected
statements often involving more family
members than a wedding reception.
Formulas and tricks.
Now, don't worry, my friends, there are
no complicated mathematical formulas
here, no calculus or trigonometry
to stress about, but mastering blood
relations definitely involves some
very clever representational tricks.
The most effective trick hands down
is drawing a family tree diagram.
For males.
You can use a plus sign or a square.
For females, a minus sign or a circle
works wonders when it comes to spouses.
Use a double-headed
arrow or a double line.
Siblings can be connected with a
single horizontal line, and for the
parent-child relationship, a vertical
line downwards or upwards with
the parent always above the child.
Is perfect.
Keep individuals on the same horizontal
level for the same generation, and
obviously on different vertical levels
for different generations mentally.
Organizing individuals by generational
levels, grandparents, parents,
self, children, grandchildren.
We'll also save you headaches and always,
always, always try to identify gender.
This little trick significantly
narrows down your possibilities.
Trust me, methods of solving.
All right, let's get down to the
nitty gritty, my friends, with our
step-by-step methods for solving
these common blood relation problems.
Method for direct relation questions.
Drawing a family tree first, start with
the very first person mentioned and try
to establish their gender if you can.
For every new relationship, add the new
person to your tree, connecting them
to existing members, using those neat
symbols we just discussed for gender,
spousal sibling or parent-child relations.
Just build that tree step by step,
making sure every new piece of
information is perfectly represented.
Once your family tree is fully charted,
simply locate the two individuals whose
relationship is being asked and trace the
path between them to find the connection.
Method for coded relation questions.
First, you absolutely must understand
the meaning of each symbol.
For example, plus means father, minus
means mother, X means brother, and so on.
Then break down the given coded
expression into smaller, manageable pairs.
Start from one end, usually the
left, and deduce the relationship
for each pair one by one.
Combine these deduced relationships
to find the final relationship
between the required individuals.
Alternatively, you can always
draw a family tree based
on these decoded relations.
Method for puzzle or
dialogue based questions.
For these, identify the speaker and
the person being referred to break
down the statement into smaller,
more manageable parts, focusing on
those off or whose clauses first as
they often hint at a closer relation.
A smart trick here is to work backward
from the end of the statement or from
the most specific relation mentioned.
For example, if someone says, he is
the son of my father's only sister.
Start with my father's only sister.
That's your aunt, right?
Then the son of your
aunt becomes your cousin.
See how that simplifies Things always
construct a mental or physical family tree
as you decode each part of the statement.
Shortcuts and smart techniques
want some shortcuts.
My friends, of course, you do.
Working backwards, especially in those
tricky dialogue based statements,
start from the end of the statement and
work your way back to the beginning.
This truly simplifies
the deduction process.
Gender elimination.
If the question asks for a specific
relationship, say sister-in-law,
and you can clearly determine the
person's gender to be male, boom.
You can immediately eliminate all
female specific options and vice versa.
One liner deduction.
For simpler direct relations, try
to combine statements into a single
mental chain of relationships
instead of drawing a full tree.
Option checking for MCQs.
In some cases, particularly with
coded relations, you might be able
to test the given options against
the decoded expression if direct
deduction seems a bit complex.
Self-referencing when a statement uses
my or mine, just treat my as yourself
and build the relation from there.
Common mistakes and misconceptions.
Now let's talk about the pitfalls,
my friends, the common mistakes
we all make confusing gender.
Never, ever assume gender based on
a name, like thinking Kirin must be
female without explicit information.
Always wait for gender to
be specified or implied by
relationship mixing up generations.
This is a big one.
Incorrectly.
Placing individuals on the wrong
generational level in your family tree
leads to blunders in relationships
like confusing a grandparent or child
with a parent or child ignoring only.
Overlooking tiny but mighty words
like only son, only daughter, or only
child, can significantly restrict
the number of family members and
change relationships incorrectly.
Interpreting in-laws, misunderstanding
terms like brother-in-law.
Remember that could be your wife's
brother, your sister's husband, or your
husband's brother, or even aunt or uncle,
which could be maternal or paternal.
Overcomplicating simple problems.
Sometimes we get so carried away drawing
intricate trees for questions that could
be solved with a quick mental deduction.
Don't overthink it my friend.
WH framework summary.
Let's quickly sum it up with
our simple WH framework.
So what is blood relation?
It's the study of familial
relationships based on either
biological ties or marriage.
Why do we study it?
Because it tests your logical reasoning
and analytical skills, which are super
crucial for problem solving in any exam.
When is it applied in real life?
Well, it's a staple in various
competitive exams, especially those
with a reasoning ability section.
Where is it used in real life?
It's all around us for family
lineage and of course in various
puzzles and logical games.
For fun.
Who needs to master this?
All my friends.
Preparing for competitive exams
like your exam, and really anyone
looking to sharpen their logical
thinking and how do we solve these?
By constructing family trees, decoding
symbols, and using logical deduction
based on the given statements.
Fully worked out examples.
Let's see.
Some real action with a few fully worked
out examples, shall we Example one direct
relation question pointing to a man.
A woman said his mother is the
only daughter of my mother.
How is the man related to the woman?
A son?
B Nephew, C brother, D uncle understand
the question before moving to explanation.
Solution.
First, let's analyze the my part.
The woman says my mother.
So let's consider the woman's mother next.
Analyze only daughter of my mother.
The woman's mother has only one
daughter since the woman is speaking.
She herself is the only
daughter of my mother.
Now combine the parts, the statement
cleverly becomes his mother is me.
The woman finally deduce the relationship.
If the man's mother is the woman, then
logically the man is the woman's son.
Correct?
Answer is a son.
Example, two coded relation question
if P plus Q means P is the father of
Q. B minus Q means B is the mother of
Q and B into Q means B is the brother
of Q. Which of the following means
A is the daughter of C, A, C plus B,
minus A, B, C, minus, A plus B, C, C
in two, B minus A D, C plus A minus B.
Understand the question
before moving to explanation.
Solution First, understand the codes.
Plus means father, minus
means mother, X means brother.
Now, let's analyze option A, C
plus B minus A. C plus B means C
is the father of B, so C is male.
B minus A means B is the
mother of a. So B is female.
If C is the father of B and B is the
mother of A, then C is a's grandfather.
So A is C'S granddaughter or grandson.
This does not mean A is the daughter
of C. So this option is out.
Let's analyze option B, C minus
A plus B. C minus A means C is
the mother of A, so C is female.
A plus B means A is the
father of B, so A is male.
If C is the mother of A, then A is the
son or daughter of C, but here A is male.
So A is the son of C. This does not mean A
is the daughter of C. Next, let's analyze
option C, C, X, B minus A, C, x. B means
C is the brother of B, so C is male.
B minus A means B is the
mother of A, so B is female.
If C is the brother of B and b is
the mother of A, then C is uncle.
So A is C's niece or nephew.
This also does not mean A is the
daughter of C. Finally, let's
analyze option D, C plus A minus.
C plus A means C is the
father of A, so C is male.
A minus B means A is the mother of
B. So A is female from C plus a. C
is indeed the father of a. And from
A minus B, we know A is female.
So if C is the father of A
and A is female, it means A
is indeed the daughter of C.
This matches our requirement.
Perfectly correct answer is
D, C plus A minus B. Example
three, puzzle based relation.
Question A is B sister, C is B's mother.
D is C's father, E is D's mother.
Then how is A related to D?
A grandfather, B grandmother, C
granddaughter, D daughter, understand the
question before moving to explanation.
Solution.
Let's break it down
statement by statement.
My friend, statement one A is B Sister, so
A is female and A is a sibling of B, B's.
Gender is still unknown.
Statement two C is B's
mother, C is female.
C is the parent of B. Since A is
B sister C is also a's mother.
Simple right statement three.
D is C's father.
D is male.
D is the parent of C. Now, since C
is a's mother and D is C's father,
then D is a's maternal grandfather.
See the connection statement
four E is Dee's mother.
This statement gives us extra
information about Dee's parent.
But we actually don't need it to
find a's relation to D. Sometimes
they add extra info just to confuse
you, but you are too smart for that.
Now, deduce the relationship between
A and D. We already established
that C is a's mother and we also
established that D is C's father.
Therefore, D is the father of a's mother,
which means D is a's maternal grandfather.
The question asks how A is related to D.
If D is a's grandfather and we know A is
female from statement one, then A must be
D's granddaughter, correct answer is C.
Granddaughter.
Thank you.
C You in the next lecture.